fnal-cetbuildtools
==================
This is a basic mirror of FNAL's CET cetbuildtools system. Built on top of CMake,
it tightly couples FNAL/CET's UPS configuration management system. This mirror
aims to modernize and decouple the system so that:

- Clients of CET software, such as Art/LArSoft, can use these without requiring the
full UPS software stack.
- CET/FNAL can still use UPS as the runtime configuration management system.

All work is done on this `modern-cmake` branch. The `master` branch is the pristine
upstream master branch, which is updated here and merged with `modern-cmake`
as needed.

This README also acts as a basic documentation of the issues encountered and their
resolutions.

Installing CetBuildTools
========================
An initial go at installing `cetbuildtools` from scratch

1. Clone the repo.
2. No instructions in repository.
3. As it provides a CMake script, assume standard cmake-style build
  - Create separate build directory at base repo level.
  - Change into this.
  - Run `cmake ..`
  - Results in the error:
    ```
    $ cmake ..
    CMake Error at Modules/CetGetProductInfo.cmake:11 (message):
    CetGetProductInfo.cmake: Can't find report_product_info
    Call Stack (most recent call first):
    Modules/CetCMakeEnv.cmake:13 (include)
    CMakeLists.txt:18 (include)


    -- Configuring incomplete, errors occurred!
    ```
  - Error is due to use of `find_program` to locate `report_product_info`
    (supplied in this project under the `bin/` directory)
    via either `CETBUILDTOOLS_DIR` or `PATH` environment variables
    - In context of build/install of `cetbuildtools` itself, use of
      `find_program` is superfluous as we know where the program is.
    - In context of using an install of `cetbuildtools`, we'll *also*
      know where the program is as we know the install hierarchy.
    - TEMPFIX: For build only, set known bin path in top level CMakescript
      modify CetGetProductInfo to use this. Later, can set this variable
      appropriately in the `cetbuildtools-config.cmake` file
  - Next Error:
    ```
    $ cmake ..
    CMake Error at Modules/CetCMakeEnv.cmake:135 (message):
    Unable to obtain product information: need to re-source
    setup_for_development?
    Call Stack (most recent call first):
    Modules/CetCMakeEnv.cmake:167 (_get_cetpkg_info)
    CMakeLists.txt:25 (cet_cmake_env)


    -- Configuring incomplete, errors occurred!
    ```
    - Following trace, this occurs with the first call to `cet_get_product_info_item`.
      This is attempting to run `report_product_info ${PROJECT_BINARY_DIR} product rproduct`.
      Running that directly in the build directory gives an error `Couldn't open /<builddir>/cetpkg_variable_report at ../bin/report_product_info line 23.`.
      That file, `cetpkg_variable_report`, appears to be generated by sourcing
      the `setup_for_development` script in the `ups/` subdirectory.
      This sourcing results in the following environment variables being set:
      - `CETPKG_SOURCE` (apparently identical to cmake var `PROJECT_SOURCE_DIR`)
      - `CETPKG_BUILD` (apparently identical to cmake var `PROJECT_BINARY_DIR`)
      - It'll also prepend `bin` dirs in both to the PATH

      In addition, sourcing the script *also* sources the
      `bin/set_dev_products` script with the above paths and the `simple`
      argument, then later also source
      `bin/set_dev_check_report` script with the `simple` argument
    - Can fix by using `execute_process` to run the `set_dev_products` script
      as in `setup_for_development`
    - Now proceed to an error:
    ```
    CMake Error at Modules/CetCMakeEnv.cmake:263 (message):
     Can't locate CETPKG_BUILD, required to build this package.
    Call Stack (most recent call first):
     CMakeLists.txt:27 (cet_cmake_env)


    -- Configuring incomplete, errors occurred!
    ```
    - If `CETPKG_BUILD` is basically equivalent to the project binary dir,
      then simple replace this
    - Can then complete configuration, then make and install!


Environment Variables
=====================
The fundamental issue limiting the portability of `cetbuildtools` is its use of UPS
specific environment variables rather than standard variables used by buildtools like
CMake, autotools and others.

- General:
  - Compilers: `CC`, `CXX`
  - Compiler/linker flags: `CFLAGS`, `CXXFLAGS`
  - Runtime: `PATH`, dynamic loader path
- CMake:
  - Package/file search paths
- pkg-config:
  - `PKG_CONFIG_PATH`

Use of non-standard variables compounded by `cetbuildtools` exported its functionality to
the config scripts used by client packages, creating vendor lock in on not only `cetbuildtools`
but also UPS.


Imported/Exported Targets
=========================
Despite CMake having full knowledge of both internal and found external programs, `cetbuildtools`
(and other CMake usage at FNAL) do not make real use of this functionality. This can cause issues
at build time if the user has not configured their PATH to include certain directories under the
build directory.


Using Cetbuildtools
===================
In general, FNAL/CET projects using `cetbuildtools` include the following stanza
at the top of their main CMake script:

```cmake
project(ThisProject)

# cetbuildtools contains our cmake modules
set (CETBUILDTOOLS_VERSION $ENV{CETBUILDTOOLS_VERSION})
if(NOT CETBUILDTOOLS_VERSION)
  message(FATAL_ERROR "ERROR: setup cetbuildtools to get the cmake modules")
endif()
set(CMAKE_MODULE_PATH $ENV{CETBUILDTOOLS_DIR}/Modules ${CMAKE_MODULE_PATH})

# ... later on ...
find_ups_product(cetbuildtools v4_07_02)

```

This requires a client of `cetbuildtools` to have set at least two environment
variables, `CETBUILDTOOLS_VERSION` *and* `CETBUILDTOOLS_DIR`. In addition, the
call to `find_ups_product` *appears* redundant (though one can't use `find_ups_product`
until `cetbuildtools` is found). TODO: check what `find_ups_product` actually does.

Provided a core set of CMake functionality is a fairly common project task,
for example in (KDE's `extra-cmake-modules`)[http://api.kde.org/ecm/manual/ecm.7.html].
To this end, the above stanza should be replaced by:

```cmake
project(ThisProject)

find_package(cetbuildtools 4.7.2 REQUIRED NO_MODULE)

list(PREPEND CMAKE_MODULE_PATH "${CETBUILDTOOLS_MODULE_PATH}")
```

Location of `cetbuildtools` is guaranteed if its install prefix is present
in the `CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH` variable. If UPS is used for SCM, then it should
set this variable appropritely for the setup product.








